(Dog barks)
(Men chatting)
What did he bring?
A proposal...from Trencrom.
Judas, Ross! Will you never learn?
Possibly not.
You are about to stand trial
for being part ofthe smuggling run.
I can't bear it all over again.
So you can tell Trencrom,
till he offers to stand in court in your place,
he can sling his proposals,
and his guineas,
and his secret caches
off Damsel Point!
My money's on transportation.
It's not essential. Elizabeth's already
unnerved by his involvement.
Any form of discredit in court today will suffice.
Hm... I admire your confidence.
When one has laid the foundations,
one has every right to expect a result.
(Bustle of market)
CLERK: Call Ross Poldark.
Well, well.
Here we are again.
There are those who seem capable
of learning from their mistakes,
and those who do not.
Clearly you fall into the latter category.
Mr Poldark?
With the deepest respect, sir,
I beg to differ.
- On what grounds?
- On the grounds that on the night in question,
I was not at Nampara Cove,
but at St Ives.
I can produce three witnesses
to swear to the fact.
Customs officer Vercoe alleges
you were part ofthe smuggling operation,
that you attacked him and broke his nose.
I'm very sorry to hear
about Mr Vercoe's injuries, sir,
but as my witnesses will testify,
the assailant could not possibly have been I.
Aye, sir. It's true, sir.
- Case dismissed.
- (Court murmurs)
Call Dwight Enys.
I have perused your statement
and I find it singularly unconvincing.
No educated man can suddenly
appear on a cliff edge
and start building a bonfire
without certain conclusions being drawn.
What explanation can you offer?
- It was a cold night and my coat was thin.
- (Ripples of laughter)
Heavy responsibility rests upon
all men of reputation
to help stamp out the illegal conduct
oftheir less enlightened neighbours,
not to encourage or participate in it.
- What have you to say?
- Nothing that would convince you, sir.
Fined £50 or three months' imprisonment.
(Hushed) Sir.
Mr Trencrom offers to pay your fine, sir.
Tell Mr Trencrom I thank him, but
I'm perfectly capable of paying my own fine.
You should take his bounty, Dwight.
- He looks afer his friends.
- Mr Trencrom is not my friend.
- I did not go to all that trouble for his sake.
- No. For mine.
- You know what I feel about that.
- You told me many times.
- I am under an enduring debt.
- No.
Enduring.
So now it's all over,
when do you leave for Bath?
- I've no plans to do so.
- Your... Your wedding to Caroline.
Is off. We were incompatible.
I see that now.
It could never have lasted and...
it would have led to misery on both sides.
What made you decide
to accept Trencrom's offer?
When a man's life is in tatters,
he can ill afford to be stubborn.
I never thought I'd see the day.
That I'd go to jail?
That you'd play the penitent to avoid it.
I played the game!
I thought that's what you wanted.
Is there really no hope for Grace?
On Saturday our coal runs out.
The engine will halt and so will
this whole dismal venture.
I'm sorry for it.
I'm sorry for many things.
Our workers, our coffers...
- And most of all, I'm sorry for you.
- Nay, Ross.
For selling my shares in a profitable mine
and sinking them into this utter folly.
All I can say is this,
- I'll never again be guilty of such recklessness.
- (Door opens)
Captain Henshawe to see you, sir.
Captain Ross. Ma'am.
Excuse the intrusion,
but I'd like for you to see something.
What's that? The last of our coal?
- Ha! Tin.
- Tin?
From that shaft we're sinking
below the 60 fathoms.
They come upon it today.
Have you been down?
Is there any size to it?
Six foot and more across
and we don't yet know how deep.
We've spent 18 months searching for copper
and you expect me to get excited
over a parcel oftin!
Who found it?
- Ted Carkeek and Paul Daniel.
- Hm...
And they think they've discovered
El Dorado!
I'd like for you to come
and see it for yourself.
Trevithick reckons his engine
should last 50 years.
No doubt he's right.
Well, given the opportunity.
- 'Tis worth a look, Captain.
- You'll not be disappointed.
Will you be joining us below, ma'am?
No, I think not, but do take my assistant,
and make sure he reports back to me.
(Demelza hums a tune)
- Betty!
- Ah. It's true?
A keenly lode found and the mine's saved?
I wish as much as you.
I'll save my wishes for an easy birthing!
That is wishful thinking!
Hello!
Good day to you, ladies.
Don't 'ee fear, Betty.
If anyone can make it right, 'tis Dr Enys.
Oh, what it is to be a miracle worker!
(Men's indistinct voices)
I agree...
It's not unimpressive.
You said all along
you'd a feeling to go deeper.
Yes, but for copper, not for tin.
Anyway, it mayjust be the merest pocket.
Bring up what you can.
It'll make a difference to your final earnings.
We'd have given up more easily
without this find.
I know that, Paul.
But it's come too late to save us.
'Tis a queer one, though.
- Copper under tin you'd expect.
- But not tin under copper.
To my mind what's needed is breathing space,
to see ifthis'll amount to anything.
- I'd agree.
- How's that to happen?
I tell you, I don't have £20 in the world.
Betty seems fair.
I wish she were stronger.
But then all these people are half-starved.
She's braver than she looks.
She wants me at the birthing.
Though in truth, she's as well offwith you
and Mrs Zacky.
It'd make her easier to know
she'll be tended by a man of learning.
With little practical experience.
It's not so. Look what you did for Rosina.
Was that not practical?
It was indeed.
Has your knee given you trouble
since the ambush?
No, sir. And I'm that grateful.
What would have happened
if 'ee hadn't come to help me?
Well, you'd be wed to Charlie!
Never knowed he was the informer.
'Tis better this way.
Is it?
If you hadn't helped Rosina...
I'd be married, in a new town,
tending new patients, living a new life.
Rosina's knee do have much to answer for!
It has saved me from myself, at any rate.
(Gulls cry)
- Doctor.
- Thank you.
Dear  Dwight. I am returning your  letters
which I have fully digested
and in which I fond nothing
to make me regret my decision.
Your preference for your patients
and friends is esteemable.
Had it not been at my expense,
I would not now be requesting you
to never  write to me again.
But it was. So I do.
Demelza?
I've been meaning to call upon you,
to thank you for your kindness
these past few months.
In lending you my husband?
In a manner of speaking.
Oh, you're welcome to him. Just so long as
you remember where he belong
and send him back to me
when you're done with him.
Mistress Poldark!
Another escape for your husband in court.
What a charmed life he leads.
It would appear so.
- For you, young man.
- George, you must stop this.
Oh, cannot a man spoil his godson?
This new find, what will it mean?
In a word...
..nothing.
Perhaps ifwe'd struck a massive bed oftin,
requiring minimum outlay
and promising a quick return...
Tin do fetch less than copper?
Considerably.
And besides, what good would it do?
The tin industry is much depressed.
Pity.
But there it is.
Did I mention that I saw Horace Treneglos
at the market?
No. Is he well?
He sends his compliments...
..and say that it's a shame that you've sold
all of your shares in Wheal Leisure.
I said that he must be mistaken.
For surely if you had, you'd have told me.
I've been meaning to mention this
for some time.
But not quite sure how to begin.
As you know, Francis sank his last £600
into Wheal Grace.
Yes...
And when he died, he left Elizabeth
with...considerable debts.
To relieve her poverty,
I...bought all his shares at Wheal Grace
through a third party,
knowing she would not accept the money.
- But why should you...
- Because I felt under a burden of obligation,
to Francis and his family...
..which is now discharged.
Of course, at the time we had Trencrom's
money coming in, but since the ambush...
Are you angry?
- That you help Elizabeth?
- And Geoffrey Charles.
And leave Jeremy and me
to fend for ourselves?
You have me to fend for you.
They have no one.
Are you sure? From what I hear,
George is being very obliging.
Hm... Doubtless he would be...
..if Elizabeth would let him.
But she will not.
George's ambition before Francis died
was to drive a wedge between our two families.
And the easiest way to do it
was by befriending theirs.
By helping Elizabeth,
he is merely continuing the same tactics.
- Yes, Ross.
- Although it wasn't my aim in helping her,
it does have the effect of strengthening
her hand against him.
Yes, Ross.
- Mistress Demelza?
- Who be that, then...
..coming across the fields?
Betty Carkeek! 'Tis 'er time!
And Dr Enys can't be found!
Ross! Fetch me the brandywine!
Calm yourself. We'll go, we'll go.
Now you stay here, Jeremy.
Thank you.
Come here. Come here. Whoa!
- Hurry!
- Sir!
Captain, er...who is it?
..er...Henshawe, asking for you.
Your mine, whatever.
Here. Take him.
Won't be long.
(Pained cry of labour)
Betty, I've brought you something for the pain.
I found him, Betty! Dr Enys be here.
(Wails)
We've opened her up a tidy bit
these past days.
The last we brought up,
'tis as rich as I'd ever seen.
Ross?
More and more it go against the grain
to let her fill up with water,
knowing what's down there.
It goes against the grain at any time!
- But without coal to keep the pump working...
- That's what I'm thinking.
I could put down £100.
It would see us through another month.
You'd be willing to do that?
After all our failures?
In a day or so, we'll know better.
If nothing comes of it, we can close
and I'll have lost £20.
With your permission,
I'll send out for more coal.
By all means, send out!
(Chuckles)
- (Pained cry of labour)
- It'll be a boy, that's for sure.
They's trouble even before they're born.
Push. Push, Betty. Push.
(She wails)
(Baby cries)
Ssh. Ssh.
Betty, 'ee'll never guess!
There's news of Grace!
And a fine new Carkeek boy!
What news of Grace?
- She's to stay open another month.
- 'Tis a present we never looked for!
God willing the lode should hold
and I'll be able to feed my family!
- To young Master Carkeek!
- And tin!
And tin!
God bless 'ee, sur.
Bless Captain Henshawe.
He's our saviour.
(Door opens)
This is becoming an obsession.
Are you planning on joining the Army?
Why would I do that when I have battlefronts
of my own at home?
Hm...
Which reminds me.
Have those forces been deployed yet?
Hm. As per  your  instructions.
Don't frown, dear.
A wrinkled brow is not becoming.
I'm at my wits' end with Tabb.
He contradicts everything I say
as if he thinks he is master here now!
And now these letters have come, all these
questions, which apparently only I can answer.
A tithe of£1 and 6 shillings on the seines
of certain fishing boats in Sawle.
"Should the fishermen be pressed for money?"
I don't know! Should they?
Can I afford not to press them?
Whose need is greater?
- Dear God, is there no end to it?
- What is it?
Who are these people?
Tinners, exercising their rights
under stannary law to prospect for tin.
But this is outrageous!
Vulgars permitted by law
to violate the purlieu of a gentleman's estate?
How can such a thing be lawful?
(Starts coughing) It's monstrous!
(Splutters) Monstrous!
(Coughs and gasps)
No sign of it petering out?
Far from it.
You know I'm not one to raise hopes,
but it could be significant.
(Tapping and hammering)
The damage is considerable.
She'll need constant care
for the foreseeable future,
possibly the rest of her life.
But...we cannot afford a nurse.
Who is to provide...
Me.
I must be the one to take care of her.
Who's to take care of me?
I was here first!
I must speak to Ross.
You'll get no sympathy from that quarter!
He was never a fan ofyour mother!
Is there no one else you can turn to?
I came as soon as I could.
How is she?
Very bad. Dr Enys fears
she may never recover.
You must know how that grieves me.
I know how fond you are of her.
- Do you know what I wish?
- No.
That you allow me
to make the arrangements,
engage a separate establishment for her
here at Trenwith
- so no further burden need fall on you.
- I couldn't let you do that.
You're so frail. You try to be strong,
but now it is you who need care.
- Let me provide it.
- You're very kind, George.
But I'm stronger than I look.
I will have to be.
- One must take what life sends.
- But not what I send?
- You've already given so much.
- For my godson, a few trifles.
For yourself, nothing.
At least let me help your dear mother.
(Elizabeth sighs)
Your generosity makes me ashamed
to refuse you anything.
Well, ifthere was one thing
you did not...refuse me,
it would solve everything.
What's that?
Yourself.
Before you speak, let me add one thing.
You must be aware how long I've loved you,
serving you only as I could,
paying back Francis's card debts,
allowing no thought of retaliation
when he persistently insulted me.
Since his death, I've served you
any way you allowed,
and will continue to do so,
whether or not I stand to gain by it.
- I'm more than grateful...
- But now I ask you to marry me.
I say that I love you.
I don't flatter myselfthat you love me.
I think you might like and respect me.
I hope in time that liking might become
something more.
- But...
- I cannot bring you breeding,
but I can bring a kind of gentility
which is all the more punctilious
for being only a generation deep.
- As for material considerations...
- Please!
You would never marry for money. If you did,
you would not be who I know you to be.
But at the risk of offending,
let me be clear about what I can offer.
My house is four times the size of Trenwith.
I have 20 servants, a park of 500 acres,
my own carriage, a phaeton.
You could have one too.
Or three or four.
I'd take you to London or Bath.
You'd wear the finest clothes,
the rarestjewels,
mix with the best in society.
As my adopted son,
Geoffrey Charles would be my heir.
For so long you have lived in a cage.
Will you not allow me to give you the key?
Oh, George...
I don't know what to say.
Say nothing, my dear.
I don't ask for an answer now.
I only ask permission to give.
It's just...that I feel so alone.
Loneliness is not one-sided, Elizabeth.
A man may feel it too.
Especially when he has loved as long
and as devotedly as I have.
And the devil taketh him up into
an exceedingly high mountain
and showeth him all the kingdoms ofthe world,
and sayeth, "All these things I will give thee."
Yes, Aunt. All these things and more besides.
A fortune for my boy
to make up for the one his father lost.
And what is he expecting in return?
A heart?
Is he aware that you have none to give,
having long ago bestowed it elsewhere?
- How soon till we need timbers?
- Timbers cost.
- But without them?
- You know as well as I do.
Is it a risk we're willing to take?
It's a risk we've been taking for some time now.
We've shored it up the best we can.
We'd sooner 'ee spend money on coal,
to keep the pump going.
There isn't a mine in existence
wouldn't take the same chance.
- That's a pretty piece.
- I made it from an old one of Ross's.
I shall wear it tonight.
We're expecting visitors.
- Do I know 'em?
- One of 'em you even like.
Huh...
You grew up here?
'Tis a veritable galleon
compared to my father's humble sloop.
Aye aye, Captain.
- Or should I say Admiral?
- My father.
Charles William Poldark.
Then he is my grandfather by proxy,
since you are my commanding officer,
- Stepmama!
- (They giggle)
Elizabeth, my dear, how are you?
May I introduce my stepson?
Midshipman James Blamey.
My sister-in-law Elizabeth Poldark.
Your servant, ma'am.
Close the hatch, dear.
We don't want to be catching flies.
- Well, Elizabeth...
- Well, cousin, how good of you to come.
AGATHA: Is that little Verity?
Bring her to me this minute!
Cutlass at the ready? (Giggles)
Had I known of your mother's condition,
we'd not have dreamed of intruding.
How difficult it must be for you.
It was at first.
But now she has a nurse and a maid.
Is that not expensive?
How strange it must be for you here,
without Francis.
No more than for you.
I've had to grow used to it.
For Geoffrey Charles's sake.
And can you?
For my son, I must do whatever's necessary.
And that, boy,
is how you put the Navy in its place!
Your great-aunt is a fiend at French Ruff.
- Obviously I let her win.
- Obviously.
We're expected at Nampara.
You'll go with us.
Oh... I...
Yes, Elizabeth?
I have a headache.
Did Elizabeth not wish to join you?
She's distressed over her mother's illness.
She sends her apologies and love.
Mistress Poldark's a thing of beauty,
do you not think?
Were I five years older,
I'd throw myself at her feet.
- She'd very likely trample you underfoot!
- (Chuckles)
On our way over I noticed the engine chimney
ofthe mine still smoking.
We continue to limp on, existing on
a shoestring, everything against us.
Not entirely! Tin has been found.
We're not sure how far or deep it goes, but...
The quality ofthe ore is promising, I admit it.
I'm very glad for you.
A change in your fortune is long deserved.
You keep a very fine ship, Captain.
- Do you have your own cabin?
- Naturally. Would you care to inspect it, sir?
So I should!
Do you see much of Elizabeth?
She don't seem inclined to visit us now.
But she's happy enough to admit Ross, or was.
Why do you ask?
I don't know, there's something...
I cannot put my finger on it.
She seems a little on edge,
as if innerly excited.
- And I got the impression...
- Yes?
..that she thinks her circumstances
are about to change.
Oh...
Do you know why that might be?
Perhaps you should ask Ross.
Sounds a little bitter.
Do it?
I only meant he sees more of her than I.
I know he did love her.
So when he goes to see her, I...
I'd not be human if I didn't wonder
what they say to each other
or...ifthey still have feelings.
Do you think they do?
They were each other's first love.
Such a love cannot easily be put aside.
- But you have no reason to think...
- No reason, just...
Ross would never mean to hurt me.
But I think if it came to a choice
between me and Elizabeth,
and with Elizabeth now free...
You cannot believe that!
Your ship is the Thunderer?
The frigate Hunter now, under Admiral Gell.
We're in Plymouth Sound at present,
but under sailing orders next week.
I'm monstrous glad of it.
I'd not want the war to end
before I've had the chance
to pepper the Frenchies!
Oh, I'm sure there'll be plenty of opportunity
for glory before the war is out.
(Door opens)
Oh. Erm... My apologies.
No, no. Come in. Join us.
May I introduce midshipman James Blamey?
My good friend, Dr Dwight Enys.
- Your servant, sir.
- And yours, sir.
If you ever tire of life ashore,
consider us poor souls in the fleet.
We're in dire need of good surgeons.
- Is that so?
- Honour and glory beckon.
As well as blood and gore.
Honour and glory I can do without.
But a mission, somewhere useful,
to direct my energies.
- We can surely provide that.
- And a good skirmish as a fine distraction.
- The point is, to do something.
- I agree.
Idleness allows us too much time to think.
What a treasure is James.
He's like the west wind,
all gusty and clean and kind.
- And he adores you!
- And I him, as if he were my own son.
Oh, Verity, I'm that glad.
It'll make up for...
For what?
My not having a child of my own?
Oh, but that's the most wonderful thing.
There is nothing to make up for!
- Verity, when?
- About October!
(Both laugh happily)
(Demelza sighs)
Is it Verity's news which keeps you awake?
I think so.
I can't imagine what else it could be.
No, I don't suppose you can.
I got the impression that she thinks
her  circumstances are about to change.
(Cockerel crows)
Is it not dangerous, Captain,
riding when you're not recovered?
You leave me no choice.
I was hoping you'd visit me as I convalesce.
Or else that I'd receive an invitation to visit you.
- Well, last time you came without an invitation.
- That was in the course of duty.
This is in the pursuit of pleasure.
Well, as you can see, my husband is not here.
Are you sure ofthat?
On my previous visit,
you told me he was from home,
yet we both know he was somewhere
about the house.
- Do we?
- Indeed.
I thought it probable,
if I posted a watch long enough,
we'd discover where he was hiding.
And did you post such a watch?
- Oh... (Laughs) I did not.
- Why?
I have too great a regard for you, ma'am.
In truth, my heart was not in it.
I'm a soldier, not a spy.
I hold nothing against Captain Poldark,
except he married so charming a wife.
So I trust you hold nothing against me
for what I did.
Indeed.
I'm obliged to you for what you did not do.
So now I'm forced to venture out
for company and gossip.
So what can you tell me? What news of
your cousin-in-law, Mistress Elizabeth?
I am sure I've heard nothing.
I'd have thought you of all people would know.
And what do you hear?
Only that Sir Hugh Bodrugan,
who shares a tailor with a certain person,
tells me that certain person
has just ordered his wedding clothes.
Judas, who's that?
Can you not guess?
Why, George Warleggan!
Had you no idea?
No. Um... Well, that is a...
Yes, I did somewhat suspicion.
No doubt you'll be able to ask him yourself
at the ball.
The ball?
Sir Hugh is to hold a ball in a week's time.
I hope you'll favour me with the ecossaise.
Yes, of course.
Well, thank you for calling, Captain McNeil.
I must go and check on Jeremy.
Pray excuse me.
(Laughs excitedly)
What ails 'ee, maid?
George Warleggan is to marry Elizabeth.
Mr Ross will be surprised.
Mr Ross mustn't be told.
He'll find out soon enough,
but it won't be from me.
(Hammering and chipping)
(Birds caw and waves crash in distance)
DWIGHT:
Fresh air, and whatever fruit you can get.
Phthisis and scurvy.
No wonder you've had your fill.
I confess, a new challenge would suit me.
A war would certainly supply that.
You're not tempted yourself?
If duty calls, I won't ignore it.
But I know enough of combat
not to relish it.
Whereas I can almost hear the cannons
as we speak.
- Look here, Ted.
- See how far we can cut it back.
(Crumbling)
(Ominous rumbling)
(Rumbling intensifies)
- She's coming down!
- Run! Run!
(Horse whinnies in distance)
(Faint cries)
Run, run! Go!
(Distant rumbling)
(Rocks falling, men shouting)
(Distant shouts, horse whinnies)
How many? How many?
It's Paul and Ted!
There's one here!
Paul!
(Groans)
- Who's unaccounted for?
- Dan Curnow and Ted Carkeek.
We don't stop until they're found.
Forgive my intrusion. I thought to bring you
the news before you heard elsewhere.
There's been an accident at Wheal Grace.
- Your cousin-in-law...
- Is dead?
Is very much alive.
Only the poor souls who labour for him
have paid the price.
What happened?
What inevitably happens
when corners are cut
and safety is abandoned in favour of profit.
I can scarce believe it.
Ross, of all people?
He's a desperate man.
One can only feel for his wife and child,
innocent casualties of his overwhelming hubris
now condemned to a life of penury.
But forgive me for keeping you
from your dear relations.
The Devil!
I hope you know what you're doing!
(Clanking and grinding of machinery)
Where's Ted?
Dwight!
How is he?
He was buried too long.
I can't bring him back.
There's nothing you can do here, Ross.
Help the others.
- One dead.
- Two.
- And five more badly injured.
- I'm to blame.
- Nay, Ross.
- Betty!
- I should've ordered timbers.
- We all knew the risks.
Grace is mine.
I should have insisted.
Ted?
20 fathoms of pumping gear have gone.
Six weeks or more to clear the debris.
200 won't even do it
even ifwe each had the capital.
Even then I wouldn't attempt it.
This mine has cost three lives!
It was an ill-conceived venture from the start.
It will never open again.
(Betty sobs)
My dear  Ross.
I do not know how to write this letter
or to tell you what I have to say...
Are you ahead?
I've already won.
- I've secured the hand ofthe woman I love.
- Elizabeth Poldark.
And in so doing, I deal the deadliest blow
to my bitterest enemy.
I see I must congratulate you.
Oh, I congratulate myself.
It's not given to many to achieve...
so much at a single stroke.
Sometimes I don't know my own strength.
What is it?
Sir Hugh Bodrugan,
inviting us to a ball.
- Oh...
- Obviously we'll decline.
Of course.
Letter come from Trenwith.
Thank you, Prudie.
ELIZABETH:
I know what I have to say will distress you,
and I, who gave you so much pain once before,
would do almost anything than
to hurt you again and in the same way.
Yet it seems I must.
Oh, Ross, my life has been very frustrating,
and since Fr ancis died,
a lonely and an empty one.
Perhaps I am the wrong sort of person
to be left alone.
I seem to need the strength and protection
only a man can give.
I have agreed to marry George Warleggan.
- I'm going to Trenwith.
- No, Ross!
- I must speak with Elizabeth.
- Ross, you can't!
Do you know what this is?
Is it about George?
- You knew?
- I heard rumours.
- You didn't think to tell me?
- And have my head snapped off?
This thing must be stopped!
How? You can't stop it!
- Perhaps you don't want me to stop it.
- Perhaps I don't.
And especially not like this.
- Like what?
- Whatever it is you intend.
How do you know what I intend?
How do I know anything, Ross?
How do I know you?
And yet I think I do.
- Please get out of my way.
- Ross, don't go there tonight.
- Wait until tomorrow.
- Please...get out...of my way.
Elizabeth!
(Approaching footsteps)
Ross!
I came to pay my respects.
And to thank you...for your letter.
- Perhaps tomorrow morning...
- No.
Not tomorrow. Now.
Downstairs, then.
I'll get a candle.
- Ross, I don't think...
- ..I should be in here.
There is no one to consider but you and I.
Ross...
I so hated having to send you that letter,
but really, I've said all there is to be said.
I disagree.
Perhaps you could clarify something for me.
- George Warleggan...
- Yes?
..a man I consider my greatest enemy.
And you...
I've long considered my greatest friend.
In which particular am I most adrift?
It's not as simple as that, Ross.
Of course I'm proud and happy
to think of you as my greatest friend.
Oh, well,
it was more than that as I recall.
Did you not tell me barely 12 months ago
that you had made a mistake
in marrying Francis?
That you realised quite soon
that it was I you had always loved?
Do you think I would have said those words
had I known what would happen to Francis?
And yet they cannot be unsaid.
I felt you needed to know.
That if you were unhappy in those early days,
then so was I,
that the mistake was not yours, but mine.
That mistake, as you call it,
has cost many people dear -
Francis, yourself, myself.
What mistake are you making now?
- I don't expect you to understand.
- Try me.
George has been so good to me
since Francis died. So kind.
Do you marry a man out of gratitude?
No. Notjust that.
You're wrong to think of him
as your greatest enemy.
- The man who tried to get me hanged?
- I don't believe he intended that.
And now I think I can help mend the breach
between you.
Are you marrying him for his money?
How dare you?
God knows I've made mistakes in my life, Ross.
But I've tried to be loyal
to the people I care for,
and what seems like disloyalty to you now
is actually loyalty to my son!
What do you suggest for me?
30 years ofwidowhood and loneliness?
Can you offer me anything else?
Do you?
Do you love George?
- Yes.
- Why do I not believe you?
Why does this remind me ofwhen
you said you loved Francis?
You asked me, would I condemn you
to 30 years ofwidowhood?
Why would I need to?
You could have your pick of 30 men!
But I won't see you condemned to George!
Please leave now, Ross.
I'm my own mistress
and I will not be instructed.
I'm sorry you feel like this but I cannot help it.
Oh, you've never been able to help anything,
have you? It's all beyond your control,
full of good intentions,
leaving a trail of havoc in your wake.
Perhaps you can't help this either.
I oppose this marriage, Elizabeth. I'd be glad of
your assurance you will not go through with it.
We both know you don't love him!
I love him to distraction
and will marry him next month!
Ross!
You're hateful, horrible. I detest you!
No, you don't.
You never have and you never will.
You would not dare! You would not dare!
I would, Elizabeth. I would.
And so would you.
(Jeremy cries)
- T'ain't right.
- T'ain't fair.
- T'int fit.
- T'int.
(Infant cries)
I must go before the household wakes.
- What shall we...
- I must think.
- When will you...
- Soon.
(Cockerel crows)
(Cantering horse approaches)
What can I say?
It was something...I cannot explain.
You must see I had no choice!
Nor I.